<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<article version="5.0" xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
         xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
         xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
         xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"
         xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
         xmlns:html="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
         xmlns:db="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook">
  <info>
    <title>Cppcheck Design Overview</title>

    <author>
      <personname><firstname>Daniel</firstname><surname>Marjamäki</surname></personname>

      <affiliation>
        <orgname>Cppcheck</orgname>
      </affiliation>
    </author>

    <pubdate>2010</pubdate>
  </info>

  <section>
    <title>Introduction</title>

    <para>This article is an overview of the design of Cppcheck.</para>

    <para>The design of Cppcheck are based on:</para>

    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>Cppcheck will never be perfectly clever</para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para>No false warnings are allowed</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
  </section>

  <section>
    <title>Limitations of static analysis</title>

    <para>It is not very reasonable to think that a static analysis tool will
    detect all bugs in your code.</para>

    <para>There are many bugs in programs that is really hard to detect for
    tools.</para>

    <para>Many bugs are caused by wrong calculations. Here is an
    example:</para>

    <programlisting>// calculate number of days
int days(int hours)
{
    return hours / 23;
}</programlisting>

    <para>A human programmer can see the error in that code because he knows
    that there are 24 hours in a day.</para>

    <para>Tools will probably not know that there are 24 hours in a
    day.</para>

    <para>A tool that tries to guarantee that all bugs are found could write a
    warning message for every calculation in the program. In my humble opinion
    it wouldn't be usable to do that.</para>

    <para>Cppcheck will only write a warning message if it can determine that
    the calculation is wrong. This approach means that many bugs will not be
    detected.</para>
  </section>

  <section>
    <title>Buffer overflows</title>

    <para>This is a simple description of the buffer overflows checking in
    Cppcheck.</para>

    <para>For simple cases, no sophisticated control flow analysis is used. If
    an array is accessed out of bounds somewhere in its scope then an error
    message will be written.</para>

    <para>An example code:</para>

    <programlisting>void f()
{
    char a[10];
    if (x + y == 2) {
        a[20] = 0;
    }
}</programlisting>

    <para>Cppcheck will report this message:</para>

    <programlisting>Array 'a[10]' index 20 out of bounds</programlisting>

    <para>Cppcheck will not try to determine how execution can reach the
    "a[20] = 0;" statement. It is assumed that all statements are reachable.
    Cppcheck will detect the error even if it is really impossible that "x + y
    == 2" is true. I still claim that this is a correct warning because the
    statement is there and it has the error.</para>

    <para>Cppcheck will also investigate function calls. But then control flow
    is needed to avoid false warnings. Here is an example that logically is
    the same as the previous example:</para>

    <para><programlisting>void f1(char *s)
{
    s[20] = 0;
}

void f2()
{
    char a[10];
    if (x + y == 2) {
        f1(a);
    }
}</programlisting>Cppcheck will report this message:</para>

    <programlisting>Array 'a[10]' index 20 out of bounds</programlisting>

    <para>If the execution reaches the function call then there will be an
    error.</para>

    <para>But if the condition is moved into "f1" then it will be necessary to
    prove that "x+y==2" can be true when the function is called from
    "f2".</para>

    <para>No error message is reported for this code:</para>

    <para><programlisting>void f1(char *s)
{
    if (x + y == 2) {
        s[20] = 0;
    }
}

void f2()
{
    char a[10];
    f1();
}</programlisting></para>
  </section>

  <section>
    <title>Memory leaks</title>

    <para>Simple control-flow analysis is made. The assumtion is that all
    conditions can always be either true or false.</para>

    <para>It is assumed that all statements are reachable.</para>

    <para>Here is an example:</para>

    <programlisting>void f()
{
    char *a = malloc(10);
    if (x + y == 2) {
        return;
    }
    free(a);
}</programlisting>

    <para>Cppcheck will determine that there is a leak at the "return;"
    statement:</para>

    <programlisting>Memory leak: a</programlisting>

    <para>Cppcheck doesn't try to determine how the execution reaches the
    "return;" statement. It will only see that if the execution reaches the
    "return;" then there will be a memory leak.</para>

    <para>This lack of advanced control-flow analysis means that many bugs are
    not detected:</para>

    <programlisting>void f(int x)
{
    char *a = 0;

    if (x == 10)
        a = malloc(10);

    if (x == 20)
        free(a);
}</programlisting>

    <para>Many other static analysis tools will probably detect that.</para>

    <para>Many memory leaks are caused by:</para>

    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>Completely forgetting to deallocate</para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para>Forgetting to deallocate in a bailout path</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <para>These types of leaks should be detected by Cppcheck.</para>
  </section>
</article>
