<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE article PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN"
"http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd">
<article>
  <articleinfo>
    <title>Writing Cppcheck rules</title>

    <author>
      <firstname>Daniel</firstname>

      <surname>Marjamäki</surname>

      <affiliation>
        <orgname>Cppcheck</orgname>
      </affiliation>
    </author>

    <pubdate>2010</pubdate>
  </articleinfo>

  <section>
    <title>Introduction</title>

    <para>This is supposed to be a manual for developers who want to write
    Cppcheck rules.</para>

    <para>There are two ways to write rules.</para>

    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>Regular expressions</term>

        <listitem>
          <para>Simple rules can be created by using regular expressions. No
          compilation is required.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term>C++</term>

        <listitem>
          <para>Advanced rules must be created with C++. These rules must be
          compiled and linked statically with Cppcheck.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>

    <para>The data used by the rules are not the raw source code. Cppcheck
    will read the source code and process it before the rules are used.</para>
  </section>

  <section>
    <title>Data representation of the source code</title>

    <para>There are two types of data you can use: symbol database and token
    list.</para>

    <section>
      <title>Token lists</title>

      <para>The code is stored in token lists (simple double-linked
      lists).</para>

      <para>The token lists are designed for rule matching. All redundant
      information is removed. A number of transformations are made
      automatically on the token lists to simplify writing rules. </para>

      <para>The class <literal>Tokenizer</literal> create the token lists and
      perform all simplifications.</para>

      <para>The class <literal>Token</literal> is used for every token in the
      token list. The <literal>Token</literal> class also contain
      functionality for matching tokens.</para>

      <section>
        <title>Normal token list</title>

        <para>The first token list that is created has many basic
        simplifications. For example:</para>

        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para>There are no templates. Templates have been
            instantiated.</para>
          </listitem>

          <listitem>
            <para>There is no "else if". These are converted into "else { if
            .."</para>
          </listitem>

          <listitem>
            <para>The bodies of "if", "else", "while", "do" and "for" are
            always enclosed in "{" and "}".</para>
          </listitem>

          <listitem>
            <para>A declaration of multiple variables is split up into
            multiple variable declarations. "int a,b;" =&gt; "int a; int
            b;"</para>
          </listitem>

          <listitem>
            <para>All variables have unique ID numbers</para>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>
      </section>

      <section>
        <title>Simplified token list</title>

        <para>The second token list that is created has all simplifications
        the normal token list has and then many more simplifications. For
        example:</para>

        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para>There is no sizeof</para>
          </listitem>

          <listitem>
            <para>There are no templates.</para>
          </listitem>

          <listitem>
            <para>Control flow transformations.</para>
          </listitem>

          <listitem>
            <para>NULL is replaced with 0.</para>
          </listitem>

          <listitem>
            <para>Static value flow analysis is made. Known values are
            inserted into the code.</para>
          </listitem>

          <listitem>
            <para>variable initialization is replaced with assignment</para>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>

        <para>The simple token list is written if you use
        <literal>--debug</literal>. For example, use <literal>cppcheck --debug
        test1.cpp</literal> and check this code:</para>

        <programlisting>void f1() {
    int a = 1;
    f2(a++);
}</programlisting>

        <para>The result is:</para>

        <programlisting>##file test1.cpp
1: void f1 ( ) {
2: ; ;
3: f2 ( 1 ) ;
4: }</programlisting>

        <para></para>
      </section>

      <section>
        <title>Reference</title>

        <para>To learn more about the token lists, the doxygen information for
        the <literal>Tokenizer</literal> is recommended.</para>

        <para>http://cppcheck.sourceforge.net/doxyoutput/classTokenizer.html</para>
      </section>

      <section>
        <title>Reference</title>

        <para>There are many </para>
      </section>
    </section>

    <section>
      <title>Symbol database</title>

      <para>TODO: write more here.</para>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section>
    <title>Regular expressions</title>

    <para>Simple rules can be defined through regular expressions.</para>

    <para>A rule consist of:</para>

    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>a pattern to search for.</para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para>an error message that is reported when pattern is found</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <para>Here is an example:</para>

    <programlisting>&lt;?xml version="1.0"?&gt;
&lt;rule data="simple"&gt;
  &lt;pattern&gt; / 0&lt;/pattern&gt;
  &lt;message&gt;
    &lt;id&gt;divbyzero&lt;/id&gt;
    &lt;severity&gt;error&lt;/severity&gt;
    &lt;summary&gt;Division by zero&lt;/summary&gt;
  &lt;/message&gt;
&lt;/rule&gt;</programlisting>

    <para>It is recommended that you use the <literal>simple</literal> token
    list whenever you can. If you need some information that is removed in it
    then try the <literal>normal</literal> token list.</para>
  </section>

  <section>
    <title>C++</title>

    <para>Advanced rules are created with C++.</para>

    <para>Here is a simple function that detects division by zero:</para>

    <programlisting>void CheckDivByZero::check()
{
    // Scan through all tokens
    for (const Token *tok = _tokens; tok; tok = tok-&gt;next()) {
        // Match tokens to see if there is division with zero..
        if (Token::Match(tok, "/ 0")) {
            // Division by zero found. Report error
            reportError(tok);
        }
    }
}</programlisting>

    <para>All rules must be encapsulated in classes. These classes must
    inherit from the base class <literal>Check</literal>.</para>

    <remark>It is also possible to inherit from
    <literal>ExecutionPath</literal>, it provides better control-flow
    analysis, but that is much more advanced. You should be a master on using
    <literal>Check</literal> before you try to use
    <literal>ExecutionPath</literal>.</remark>

    <para>Adding your rules to Cppcheck is easy. Just make sure they are
    linked with Cppcheck when it is compiled. Cppcheck will automatically use
    all rules that are compiled into it.</para>

    <para>TODO: A full example?</para>

    <para></para>

    <para>The recommendation is that you use the simple token list whenever
    possible. Only use the normal token list when necessary.</para>

    <para></para>

    <para></para>

    <para>TODO: more descriptions</para>

    <para></para>
  </section>
</article>
